Edited and restructured `server-api` file (#4106)
jupyterhub/jupyterhub: docs/source/reference/server-api.md

# Starting servers with the JupyterHub API

> Sometimes, such as when working with applications such as [BinderHub](https://binderhub.readthedocs.io), it may be necessary to launch Jupyter-based services on behalf of your users. Doing so can be achieved through JupyterHub's [REST API](../reference/rest.md), which allows one to launch and manage servers on behalf of users through API calls instead of through the JupyterHub UI. In doing so, you can take advantage of other user/launch/lifecycle patterns that are not natively supported by JupyterHub, all without the need to develop the server management features of JupyterHub Spawners and/or Authenticators.

Reviewer: Let's avoid `such as` twice in one clause. Maybe `like BinderHub...`? Or just remove the first `such as` for `Sometimes, when working with...`

Author: Resolved

This tutorial goes through the processes involved while working with the JupyterHub API to manage servers for users. In particular, it covers how to:

1. [Check the status of servers](checking)
2. [Start servers](starting)
3. [Wait for servers to be ready](waiting)
4. [Communicate with servers](communicating)
5. [Stop servers](stopping)

> In the end, we also provide a sample Python code that can be used to implement these steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the end, we also provide sample Python code that can be used to implement these steps.
```

(checking)=

## Checking server status

> First, request information about a particular user using a GET request as below.

Reviewer: I don't think we need 'following' or 'as below' when discussing things that immediately appear. A colon flows it into the sentence:

```suggestion
First, request information about a particular user with a GET request:
```

  }
```

> Note that `ready` is assigned `false` and `pending` is assigned `spawn`, meaning that the server is not ready and attempting to access it may not work as it is still in the process of spawning.

Reviewer: I'm not sure `assigned` is helpful here. I would still say `ready is false`. But if you do find we need different language, I would probably pick something like 'has the value'. But in short, I think `is` is clear and concise and standard language for a field having a value.

Can you speak more to removing the link? It seems useful to keep it here that we're going to get more into that later.

Author: I have removed `assigned` as suggested. I have also returned the link as your explanation makes sense. I removed it as I figured the reader will get to the section either way, so it did not add any value having the information.

[waiting for a server]: waiting

(starting)=

## Starting servers

> To start a server, make the following API request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start a server, make the API request:
```

Author: I have used "this" rather than "the"

```
POST /hub/api/users/:username/servers/[:servername]
```

**Required scope: `servers`**

Assuming the request was valid, there are two possible responses:

201 Created
: This status code means the launch completed and the server is ready and is available at the server's URL immediately.

202 Accepted
: This is the more likely response, and means that the server has begun launching,
but is not immediately ready. As a result, the server shows `pending: 'spawn'` at this point and you should wait for it to start.

(waiting)=

## Waiting for a server to start

> After receiving a `202 Accepted` response, you have to wait for it to start. Two approaches can be applied to establish when the server is ready:

Reviewer: FWIW, It's helpful for collaboration and review to wrap lines at sentence (or clause) boundaries,
rather than wrapping whole paragraphs onto one line.

Author: Do you mean to break sentences using the "Enter" button here? So that we do not have long paragraphs? I have not really understood what you mean by this comment but I have broken the two sentences here.

1. {ref}`Polling the server model <polling>`

> 2. {ref}`Using the Progress API <progress>`

Reviewer: Thanks for your explanation for this change! I don't think it qualifies as a proper noun, though: progress is a generic term. If Progress were a resource type, I might agree, but it's not - it's one endpoint that yields progress information.

```suggestion
2. {ref}`Using the progress API <progress>`
```

Author: Thanks. I agree that if it some generic term, then it does not count as a proper noun.

(polling)=

### Polling the server model

The simplest way to check if a server is ready is to programmatically query the server model until the following two conditions are true:

> : 1. The server name is contained in the `servers` response, and

Reviewer: These colons are meant for definition lists. I suspect they should be removed. You can check the resulting rendered docs [here](https://jupyterhub--4106.org.readthedocs.build/en/4106/reference/server-api.html#polling-the-server-model).

Author: Thank you.

        return False
```

> The function polls the server until `ready` is true.

Author: I have returned the initial text.

(progress)=

### Using the Progress API

The most _efficient_ way to wait for a server to start is by using the Progress API. The progress URL is available in the server model under `progress_url` and has the form `/hub/api/users/:user/servers/:servername/progress`.

The default server progress can be accessed at `:user/servers//progress` or `:user/server/progress` as demonstrated in the following GET request:

```
GET /hub/api/users/:user/servers/:servername/progress
```

**Required scope: `read:servers`**

> The Progress API is an example of a [EventStream][] API. Therefore, as in a typical event stream, messages are _streamed_ and delivered in the form:

Author: Deleted the "as in a typical event stream" part.

: present and true only for the last event when the server is ready

url
: only present if `ready` is true; will be the server's URL

> The progress API can be used even with fully ready servers. In such a situation, there will only be one event response of the form:

Author: Thank you. I will use less of the filler texts.

}
```

> In this case, `ready` and `url` are the same as in the server model, and `ready` will always be true.

Author: Noted and thank you.

DELETE /hub/api/users/:user/servers/[:servername]
```

> **Required scope: `servers`**

Author: I have returned it in the latest commit.

**Required scope: `servers`**

Similar to when starting a server, issuing the DELETE request above might not stop the server immediately. Instead, the DELETE request has two possible response codes:

204 Deleted
: This status code means the delete completed and the server is fully stopped.
It will now be absent from the user `servers` model.

202 Accepted
: This code means your request was accepted, but is not yet completely processed.
The server has `pending: 'stop'` at this point.

There is no progress API for checking when a server actually stops.
Thus, the only available alternative is to poll the server and wait for it to disappear from the user `servers` model.

> This Python code snippet can be used to check if a server stops:

Reviewer: That's not quite what the code does. It _stops_ the server, and then waits for it to finish stopping.

Author: I have rephrased the sentence. Please check whether it is accurate.

*or* be an admin token if admin_access is enabled.
```

The URL returned from a server model is the URL path suffix,
e.g. `/user/:name/` to append to the jupyterhub base URL.

For instance, `{hub_url}{server_url}`,

> where `hub_url` would be such as `http://127.0.0.1:8000` by default,

Reviewer: 'For example' (e.g.) is more natural than 'such as' here

```suggestion
where `hub_url` would be e.g. `http://127.0.0.1:8000` by default,
```

> and `server_url` is `/user/myname.` When combined, the two give a full URL of `http://127.0.0.1:8000/user/myname`.

Reviewer: Period shouldn't be inside literals:

```suggestion
and `server_url` is `/user/myname`.
When combined, the two give a full URL of `http://127.0.0.1:8000/user/myname`.
```

Author: I have also rephrased the sentence.

## Python example

The JupyterHub repo includes a complete example in {file}`examples/server-api`

> tying all the above mentioned steps together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tying all these steps together.
```

> In summary, the steps involved while managing servers on behalf of users are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, the steps involved in managing user servers via the JupyterHub API are:
```
